---
title: "AI-based differential diagnosis of dementia etiologies on multimodal data"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2024-06-06
excerpt: ''
date: 2024-06-06
venue: 'Nature Medicine'
paperurl: 'https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC10996713/'
citation: "Xue C, Kowshik SS, Lteif D, Puducheri S, Jasodanand VH, Zhou OT, Walia AS, Guney OB, Zhang JD, Pham ST, Kaliaev A, Andreu-Arasa VC, Dwyer BC, Farris CW, Hao H, Kedar S, Mian AZ, Murman DL, O'Shea SA, Paul AB, Rohatgi S, Saint-Hilaire MH, Sartor EA, Setty BN, Small JE, Swaminathan A, Taraschenko O, Yuan J, Zhou Y, Zhu S, Karjadi C, Ang TFA, Bargal SA, Plummer BA, Poston KL, Ahangaran M, Au R, Kolachalama VB. AI-based differential diagnosis of dementia etiologies on multimodal data. medRxiv [Preprint]. 2024 Mar 26:2024.02.08.24302531. doi: 10.1101/2024.02.08.24302531. PMID: 38585870; PMCID: PMC10996713."
---

Differential diagnosis of dementia remains a challenge in neurology due to symptom overlap across etiologies, yet it is crucial for formulating early, personalized management strategies. Here, we present an AI model that harnesses a broad array of data, including demographics, individual and family medical history, medication use, neuropsychological assessments, functional evaluations, and multimodal neuroimaging, to identify the etiologies contributing to dementia in individuals. The study, drawing on 51,269 participants across 9 independent, geographically diverse datasets, facilitated the identification of 10 distinct dementia etiologies. It aligns diagnoses with similar management strategies, ensuring robust predictions even with incomplete data. Our model achieved a micro-averaged area under the receiver operating characteristic curve (AUROC) of 0.94 in classifying individuals with normal cognition, mild cognitive impairment and dementia. Also, the micro-averaged AUROC was 0.96 in differentiating the dementia etiologies. Our model demonstrated proficiency in addressing mixed dementia cases, with a mean AUROC of 0.78 for two co-occurring pathologies. In a randomly selected subset of 100 cases, the AUROC of neurologist assessments augmented by our AI model exceeded neurologist-only evaluations by 26.25%. Furthermore, our model predictions aligned with biomarker evidence and its associations with different proteinopathies were substantiated through postmortem findings. Our framework has the potential to be integrated as a screening tool for dementia in various clinical settings and drug trials, with promising implications for person-level management.
